Document details of question scoring (#8597)
PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn: docs/assessment.md

- If a zone has `bestQuestions`, then, of the questions in this zone, only `bestQuestions` with the highest number of awarded points will count toward the total points.

## Question points for `Homework` assessments

> Assessments with `"type": "Homework"` are designed to allow students to repeatedly practice different variants of questions (that is, different random values in the question) until they achieve mastery. The assumption here is that any student should be able to receive full points for a homework question if they work long enough on it. See [Question scoring details for `Homework` assessments] for details on the exact scoring algorithm.

Reviewer: This one missed the link conversion.

Each question is assigned a set number of _auto points_ (points that are automatically assigned by an internal or external grader) and _manual points_ (points that are [assigned manually by a human grader](manualGrading.md)).

Auto-grading points are set using the `autoPoints` value, which must be a single number and which corresponds to the initial value of a correct attempt. For example, if we have `"autoPoints": 3` then a correct answer is worth 3 points, while a 50%-correct answer is worth 1.5 points.

> If a student answers a question incorrectly then a new question variant is generated with new random numbers and the student can try again. There is no penalty for incorrect answers and students can try as many times as they like. Also see the `triesPerVariant` option in [Limiting the number of attempts for each question].

Reviewer: Nit
```suggestion
If a student answers a question incorrectly, then a new question variant is generated with new random numbers and the student can try again. There is no penalty for incorrect answers and students can try as many times as they like. Also see the `triesPerVariant` option in [Limiting the number of attempts for each question].
```

Author: Fixed in 30632408269144c317f20f95d6d3caf9042605e3

> If a student answers a question incorrectly, a new question variant is generated with new random numbers and the student can try again. There is no penalty for incorrect answers and students can try as many times as they like. Also see the `triesPerVariant` option in [Limiting the number of attempts for each question].

Reviewer: Did you mean the square brackets to be a link? You need `[Limiting the number ...](#limiting-the-number...)`.

Author: Link fixed in 8f5ca7f9ebf654f5d39e53e293602ce512dc5f98

> To encourage students to solve the same question correctly more than once (to emphasize mastery), a question can have `maxAutoPoints` set to a value that is more than `autoPoints`. In this case a student can get credit for multiple correct solutions, each for a different randomized variant, until reaching `maxAutoPoints`. For example, if we have `"autoPoints": 3` and `"maxAutoPoints": 9` then the student could solve three different variants of the question correctly and receive 3 points for each of them. After this the student can continue to solve the question for practice but they will not receive any more points for it. If `maxAutoPoints` is not specified then the question acts as if `maxAutoPoints` is equal to `autoPoints`. The use of `maxAutoPoints` means that the question has a total value of `maxAutoPoints` points, so in the previous example this is effectively a 9-point question (from `maxAutoPoints`) event though `autoPoints` is set to 3. To receive full points for the question the student will have to answer it correctly more than once.

Reviewer: event though -> even though
```suggestion
To encourage students to solve the same question correctly more than once (to emphasize mastery), a question can have `maxAutoPoints` set to a value that is more than `autoPoints`. In this case a student can get credit for multiple correct solutions, each for a different randomized variant, until reaching `maxAutoPoints`. For example, if we have `"autoPoints": 3` and `"maxAutoPoints": 9` then the student could solve three different variants of the question correctly and receive 3 points for each of them. After this the student can continue to solve the question for practice but they will not receive any more points for it. If `maxAutoPoints` is not specified then the question acts as if `maxAutoPoints` is equal to `autoPoints`. The use of `maxAutoPoints` means that the question has a total value of `maxAutoPoints` points, so in the previous example this is effectively a 9-point question (from `maxAutoPoints`) even though `autoPoints` is set to 3. To receive full points for the question the student will have to answer it correctly more than once.
```

Author: Applied.

- **`maxAutoPoints`** is the maximum number of points that the student can receive for a question, regardless of how many times they answer it correctly.

The basic idea is that students should receive `autoPoints` each time they solve the question successfully, up to a maximum of `maxAutoPoints`. When partial credit is awarded, a student receives partial points for the question, but only if they are getting closer to a correct answer. For example, if a student repeatedly answers a question with 50% correct answers then they will receive 50% points for the first such answer, but they will not be able to build up points to reach `maxAutoPoints`. They will need to answer the question 100% correctly to be able to advance their points past the 50% mark.

The exact details of how PrairieLearn awards points are as follows. First, a number of variables are computed internally by PrairieLearn as the student answers the question:
- **Submission percentage score** is the score (between 0% and 100%) that the student receives for any given submission attempt, as evaluated by the question grading specification.

> - **Best current score** is the highest submission percentage score that the student has received since last achieving 100% for a submission. This is initialized to zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Best current score** is the highest submission percentage score that the student so far. If the student has already achieved 100% for a submission at least once, it is the highest submission percentage score the student has received since last achieving 100% for a submission. This is initialized to zero.
```

Author: Done in 4191a4335164ac391314b4b9f76d725eba219f17

> - **Question value** is the current maximum number of points that the question is worth. This starts at `autoPoints` and increases by `autoPoints` for each consecutive correct submission. This is initialized to `autoPoints`.

Reviewer: This is already covered in https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/blob/f1a2a517b07ecd1bc1c78d52c12c0ec518fa136a/docs/assessment.md?plain=1#L117

I'd suggest merging both for clarity, either here or there. Alternatively, I'd suggest referring to the paragraph there.

Author: In 2a6b0b65ab8f28627eaf52dbf629c4a931ddbdb6 I rearranged the earlier section on question points to address this. I split the "question points" section into two sections, one for Homework and one for Exam. I felt that this was clearer than having to always have "for Homework" or "for Exam" scattered throughout the section. It does mean that there is now some duplication, especially regarding manual grading, but I think it's clearer for readers if not for writers.

I'm now treating the "Question points" sections as high-level overviews and the "Question scoring details" sections as all the gory specifics. I cross-reference between them all to hopefully direct people to the right place.

Let me know what you think about this new layout.

I also attempted to address the slack question from @jlumbroso in 6a10b02ce91c2c662d73b6910e13593d4d23c27c -- let me know whether you think I succeeded in this or if there is more we could do there.

Reviewer: Personally I think "Question scoring details" could be a sub-section of "Question points" for the specific type, or at least come right after it, to avoid requiring back-and-forth in the description, but I don't feel strongly about this.

Author: Yep, I think something like that could be made to work. However, I'm also trying to minimize the level of nesting here, so I'll leave it as is.

1. If the `submission percentage score` is more than `best current score`, add `(submission percentage score - best current score) / 100 * question value` to `question points`, capping `question points` at `maxAutoPoints`.
2. If the `submission percentage score` is 100%, then reset `best current score` to zero. Otherwise, if the `submission percentage score` is more than `best current score`, then set `best current score` to `submission percentage score`.
3. If the `submission percentage score` is 100%, then increase `question value` by `autoPoints`. Otherwise set `question value` to `autoPoints`. If `constantQuestionValue` is true then skip this step.

As an example, suppose a student makes 8 submissions of varying degrees of correctness to a question. Assume the question has `autoPoints` set to 4 and `maxAutoPoints` set to 10. The student's submissions are as follows:

Submission number | Submission perc. score | Best current score | Question value | Question points | Comment
--- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
Init | - | 0 | 4 | 0 | Initial values
1 | 50% | 50% | 4 | 2 | (50% - 0%) * 4 = 2 points awarded
2 | 80% | 80% | 4 | 3.2 | (80% - 50%) * 4 = 1.2 points awarded

> 3 | 20% | 80% | 4 | 3.2 | No improvement in score, so no points awarded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3 | 20% | 80% | 4 | 3.2 | No improvement in score, so no points awarded or deducted
```

Author: Done in 4191a4335164ac391314b4b9f76d725eba219f17

4 | 100% | 0% | 8 | 4 | (100% - 80%) * 4 = 0.8 points awarded, `best current score` reset to 0%, `question value` increased to 8
5 | 50% | 50% | 4 | 8 | (50% - 0%) * 8 = 4 points awarded, `question value` reset to 4
6 | 0% | 50% | 4 | 8 | No improvement in score, so no points awarded
7 | 90% | 90% | 4 | 9.6 | (90% - 50%) * 4 = 1.6 points awarded
8 | 100% | 0% | 8 | 10 | (100% - 90%) * 4 = 0.4 points awarded, `best current score` reset to 0%, `question value` increased to 8

After the eight submissions above the student has achieved maximum points for the question. They can continue to answer the question for additional practice but they cannot earn any more points for it.

## Question scoring for `Exam` assessments

> Assessments with `"type": "Exam"` are designed to test students' knowledge of course material. Students can retry questions for reduced points, so long as `allowRealTimeGrading` is true (the default). This section describes in detail how repeated attempts are scored, assuming that the question has `autoPoints` set to an array of values.

Reviewer: I'm wondering if using "list" or "sequence" instead of "array" may be better for non-tech instructors? Both here and in other references?

Author: Done in 4191a4335164ac391314b4b9f76d725eba219f17. I changed all uses of `array` to `list` in this file. I didn't modify other doc files at the moment.

The details of how scoring works are made more complex by the fact that a student may receive partial credit for any given submission attempt. PrairieLearn uses a scoring system that has four key properties, assuming that `autoPoints` is an array of decreasing values:
1. A student can never lose points by attempting a question again.
2. If a student submits a more correct answer than their previous answers, they will always receive some additional points for it.
3. Taking more attempts to answer correctly will always be worth less points than answering in fewer attempts, so students are always incentivized to answer questions correctly as soon as possible.
4. The total number of submission attempts that a student can make is limited by the number of entries in `autoPoints`.

The exact details of how PrairieLearn awards points are as follows. First, a number of variables are computed internally by PrairieLearn as the student answers the question:
- **Submission percentage score** is the score (between 0% and 100%) that the student receives for any given submission attempt, as evaluated by the question grading specification.

> - **Best current score** is the highest submission percentage score that the student has received since last achieving 100% for a submission. This is initialized to zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Best current score** is the highest submission percentage score that the student so far. This is initialized to zero.
```
This is exam, once you get 100% you are done.

Author: Done in 4191a4335164ac391314b4b9f76d725eba219f17

],
```

> When using `maxAutoPoints`, the number of correct answers needed to obtain the full points available for a question can be a little complicated. If we use `"constantQuestionValue": true` then the question value never changes and so the number of correct answers needed is just `maxAutoPoints / autoPoints`. However, in the default case when `constantQuestionValue` is false, repeated correct answers will allow a student to reach the `maxAutoPoints` more quickly. For example, with `autoPoints` of 3 and `maxAutoPoints` of 30, a student who answers the question correctly just 4 times in a row will receive the full 3+6+9+12=30 points. This means that a student who has achieved mastery can quickly complete the question. In contrast, a student who is struggling with the question may have to answer it correctly up to 30/3=10 times if they make repeated mistakes along the way to keep resetting the question value back to 3.

Reviewer: I don't like saying in the docs that something is "a little complicated".

```suggestion
When using `maxAutoPoints`, the number of correct answers needed to obtain the full points available for a question can vary depending on how many consecutive correct answers the student is able to submit. If we use `"constantQuestionValue": true` then the question value never changes and so the number of correct answers needed is just `maxAutoPoints / autoPoints`. However, in the default case when `constantQuestionValue` is false, repeated correct answers will allow a student to reach the `maxAutoPoints` more quickly. For example, with `autoPoints` of 3 and `maxAutoPoints` of 30, a student who answers the question correctly just 4 times in a row will receive the full 3+6+9+12=30 points. This means that a student who has achieved mastery can quickly complete the question. In contrast, a student who is struggling with the question may have to answer it correctly up to 30/3=10 times if they make repeated mistakes along the way to keep resetting the question value back to 3.
```

Author: Applied.

> Manual grading points are set using the `manualPoints`. It is acceptable to use only one of `autoPoints` or `manualPoints`, in which case the other part of the points will be assigned a value of 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manual grading points are set by providing a value to `manualPoints`. It is acceptable to use only one of `autoPoints` or `manualPoints`, in which case the other part of the points will be assigned a value of 0. Note that manual points are only applied to a question once, regardless of the number of submissions or variants the student answers.
```

Author: Applied.

A question may also set a value to `points` instead of `autoPoints` and `manualPoints`. If this option is used, questions with a `gradingMethod` set to `Manual` will be assigned only manual points, while questions with other grading methods will be assigned only auto points. To avoid ambiguity, it is an error to use both `points` and `autoPoints`, or `points` and `manualPoints`, in the same question. If `points` is used, then `maxPoints` should be used instead of `maxAutoPoints`.

## Question points for `Exam` assessments

> Assessments with `"type": "Exam"` are designed to test students' knowledge of course material. Students can retry questions for reduced points, so long as `allowRealTimeGrading` is true (the default). See [Question scoring details for `Exam` assessments] for details on the exact scoring algorithm.

Reviewer: Ditto.

Author: Link fixed in 8f5ca7f9ebf654f5d39e53e293602ce512dc5f98

Each question is assigned a set number of _auto points_ (points that are automatically assigned by an internal or external grader) and _manual points_ (points that are [assigned manually by a human grader](manualGrading.md)).

Exam questions only ever generate a single random variant of the question, but students may be able to make multiple attempts to answer the question (assuming that the default of `allowRealTimeGrading` is used so that students can know whether their answers are incorrect and need to be reattempted). For each question, auto-grading points are set using the `autoPoints` value, which is a list of values like [10, 7, 5]. This would mean that a correct answer on the first attempt is worth 10 points, a correct answer on the second attempt is worth 7 points, and so on. If `autoPoints` is set to a single value rather than a list then only a single attempt is allowed for that number of points.

> If a student receives partial credit for an answer then the receive correspondingly reduced points. For example, with [10, 7, 5] `autoPoints`, a 50%-correct submission on the first attempt would be worth 5 points. The exact details of how points are awarded are described in [Question scoring details for `Exam` assessments]. The principles of this scoring system are that students should be incentivized to answer questions correctly as soon as possible, and that students should never lose points by attempting a question again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a student receives partial credit for an answer then they receive correspondingly reduced points. For example, with [10, 7, 5] `autoPoints`, a 50%-correct submission on the first attempt would be worth 5 points. The exact details of how points are awarded are described in [Question scoring details for `Exam` assessments]. The principles of this scoring system are that students should be incentivized to answer questions correctly as soon as possible, and that students should never lose points by attempting a question again.
```

Author: Applied.

> Manual grading points are set using the `manualPoints`. It is acceptable to use only one of `autoPoints` or `manualPoints`, in which case the other part of the points will be assigned a value of 0.

Reviewer: Same suggestion as before.

Author: Fixed in 796f201cbca5383e78705d71ae58930e7f26e181

> If a student receives partial credit for an answer then they receive correspondingly reduced points. For example, with [10, 7, 5] `autoPoints`, a 50%-correct submission on the first attempt would be worth 5 points. The exact details of how points are awarded are described in [Question scoring details for `Exam` assessments]. The principles of this scoring system are that students should be incentivized to answer questions correctly as soon as possible, and that students should never lose points by attempting a question again.

Reviewer: Ditto.

Author: Link fixed in 8f5ca7f9ebf654f5d39e53e293602ce512dc5f98

A question may also set a value to `points` instead of `autoPoints` and `manualPoints`. If this option is used, questions with a `gradingMethod` set to `Manual` will be assigned only manual points, while questions with other grading methods will be assigned only auto points. To avoid ambiguity, it is an error to use both `points` and `autoPoints`, or `points` and `manualPoints`, in the same question. If `points` is used, then `maxPoints` should be used instead of `maxAutoPoints`.

## Question scoring details for `Homework` assessments

> This section describes in detail how repeated attempts are scored for `Homework` questions, assuming that the question has `autoPoints`. See [Question points for `Homework` assessments] for a high-level overview.

Reviewer: Ditto.

Reviewer: Also, this section explains auto-points, not manual points. I believe this should be explicitly clarified, either in this paragraph or in the section header just before it.

Author: Link fixed in 8f5ca7f9ebf654f5d39e53e293602ce512dc5f98

Author: Clarified that `manualPoints` are handled separately in 8e846791941751a42bc6061e0b20d63b9bea0b50

- **Question value** is the current maximum number of points that the question is worth. This starts at `autoPoints` and increases by `autoPoints` for each consecutive correct submission. This is initialized to `autoPoints`.
- **Question points** is the total number of points earned by the student for the question. This will never decrease. This is initialized to zero.

For each submission attempt made by a student, the scoring algorithm is as follows:

1. If the `submission percentage score` is more than `best current score`, add `(submission percentage score - best current score) / 100 * question value` to `question points`, capping `question points` at `maxAutoPoints`.
2. If the `submission percentage score` is 100%, then reset `best current score` to zero. Otherwise, if the `submission percentage score` is more than `best current score`, then set `best current score` to `submission percentage score`.

> 3. If the `submission percentage score` is 100%, then increase `question value` by `autoPoints`. Otherwise set `question value` to `autoPoints`. If `constantQuestionValue` is true then skip this step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If the `submission percentage score` is 100% and `constantQuestionValue` is not set to true, then increase `question value` by `autoPoints`. Otherwise set `question value` to `autoPoints`.
```

Author: Applied.

| 6                 | 0%                     | 50%                | 4              | 8               | No improvement in score, so no points awarded or deducted                                                 |
| 7                 | 90%                    | 90%                | 4              | 9.6             | (90% - 50%) \* 4 = 1.6 points awarded or deducted                                                         |
| 8                 | 100%                   | 0%                 | 8              | 10              | (100% - 90%) \* 4 = 0.4 points awarded, `best current score` reset to 0%, `question value` increased to 8 |

After the eight submissions above the student has achieved maximum points for the question. They can continue to answer the question for additional practice but they cannot earn any more points for it.

## Question scoring details for `Exam` assessments

This section describes in detail how repeated attempts are scored for `Exam` questions, assuming that the question has `autoPoints` set to a list of values. See [Question points for `Exam` assessments] for a high-level overview.

The important question configuration setting is:

> - **`autoPoints`** is a list of points, with the `n`-th entry being the number of points that a student receives for a fully correct submission on the `n`-th attempt at the question. If `autoPoints` is set to a single value rather than a list then only a single attempt is allowed.

Reviewer: Should it be made clear that only valid submissions count as an attempt, and only if "Save and Grade" is used?

Author: Clarified in 1e73849f00f656ea8b00a928ffa8de5ea20afa59

The basic idea is that `autoPoints` is set to a decreasing sequence of points, such as `[10, 7, 5, 2]`. In this case, a correct answer on the first attempt is worth 10 points, a correct answer on the second attempt is worth 7 points, and so on. If the student does not answer the question correctly after four attempts, they will receive 0 points for the question and cannot attempt it again.

The details of how scoring works are made more complex by the fact that a student may receive partial credit for any given submission attempt. PrairieLearn uses a scoring system that has four key properties, assuming that `autoPoints` is a list of decreasing values:

1. A student can never lose points by attempting a question again.

> 2. If a student submits a more correct answer than their previous answers, they will always receive some additional points for it.

Reviewer: I don't like "more correct"...

```suggestion
2. If a student submits an answer with a higher partial credit than their previous answers, they will always receive some additional points for it.
```

Author: Clarified in 9955823cc643f227ca02ce0524ea89f9c7e8c5fa

4. The total number of submission attempts that a student can make is limited by the number of entries in `autoPoints`.

The exact details of how PrairieLearn awards points are as follows. First, a number of variables are computed internally by PrairieLearn as the student answers the question:

- **Submission percentage score** is the score (between 0% and 100%) that the student receives for any given submission attempt, as evaluated by the question grading specification.
- **Best current score** is the highest submission percentage score the student has received so far. This is initialized to zero.
- **Question value** is the current maximum number of points that the question is worth. This is equal to `autoPoints[n]` for the `n`-th attempt at the question.
- **Question points** is the total number of points earned by the student for the question. This will never decrease. This is initialized to zero.

For the `n`-th submission attempt made by a student, the scoring algorithm is as follows:

1. Set the `question value` to `autoPoints[n]`.

> 2. Add `max(0, submission percentage score - best current score) / 100 * question value` to `question points`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If the `submission percentage score` is more than `best current score`, add `(submission percentage score - best current score) / 100 * question value` to `question points`.
```

Author: Applied.

3. If the `submission percentage score` is more than `best current score`, then set `best current score` to `submission percentage score`.

> 4. If the `submission percentage score` is 100% or `n` is the last attempt, then prohibit further submissions to the question.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If the `submission percentage score` is 100% and there are no manual points, or `n` is the last attempt, then prohibit further submissions to the question.
```

Author: Applied.

A question may also set a value to `points` instead of `autoPoints` and `manualPoints`. If this option is used, questions with a `gradingMethod` set to `Manual` will be assigned only manual points, while questions with other grading methods will be assigned only auto points. To avoid ambiguity, it is an error to use both `points` and `autoPoints`, or `points` and `manualPoints`, in the same question. If `points` is used, then `maxPoints` should be used instead of `maxAutoPoints`.

## Question points for `Exam` assessments

Assessments with `"type": "Exam"` are designed to test students' knowledge of course material. Students can retry questions for reduced points, so long as `allowRealTimeGrading` is true (the default). See [Question scoring details for `Exam` assessments](#question-scoring-details-for-exam-assessments) for details on the exact scoring algorithm.

> Each question is assigned a set number of _auto points_ (points that are automatically assigned by an internal or external grader) and _manual points_ (points that are [assigned manually by a human grader](manualGrading.md)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each question is assigned a set number of _auto points_ (points that are automatically assigned by an internal or external grader) and _manual points_ (points that are [assigned manually by a human grader](manualGrading/index.md)).
```

| 3                 | 20%                    | 80%                | 4              | 3.2             | No improvement in score, so no points awarded or deducted                                                 |
| 4                 | 100%                   | 0%                 | 8              | 4               | (100% - 80%) \* 4 = 0.8 points awarded, `best current score` reset to 0%, `question value` increased to 8 |
| 5                 | 50%                    | 50%                | 4              | 8               | (50% - 0%) \* 8 = 4 points awarded, `question value` reset to 4                                           |
| 6                 | 0%                     | 50%                | 4              | 8               | No improvement in score, so no points awarded or deducted                                                 |
| 7                 | 90%                    | 90%                | 4              | 9.6             | (90% - 50%) \* 4 = 1.6 points awarded or deducted                                                         |

> | 8                 | 100%                   | 0%                 | 8              | 10              | (100% - 90%) \* 4 = 0.4 points awarded, `best current score` reset to 0%, `question value` increased to 8 |

Reviewer: I'd suggest adding a new submission with 100%, so that the increased question value can be seen in practice. This would imply increasing the max points to 18, and updating the following paragraph. Alternatively, max points could be set to 16, so that the cap can be used as well.

Author: Added in 8a13d590e9b8533f33ce23a2df9beb1e877c13da

- **Question value** is the current maximum number of points that the question is worth. This starts at `autoPoints` and increases by `autoPoints` for each consecutive correct submission. This is initialized to `autoPoints`.
- **Question points** is the total number of points earned by the student for the question. This will never decrease. This is initialized to zero.

> When a student submits an answer to a question, the submission is first checked for validity. For example, the `pl-number-input` element considers a non-numeric input to be invalid. If the submission is valid then it is next determined whether it should be graded. A submission is only graded if explicitly requested by the student using the "Save & Grade" button, or if was the last submission when the assessment was closed.

Author: Changed in 73bed39950cc838d14c92387045d200036099085

- **Question value** is the current maximum number of points that the question is worth. This is equal to `autoPoints[n]` for the `n`-th attempt at the question.
- **Question points** is the total number of points earned by the student for the question. This will never decrease. This is initialized to zero.

> When a student submits an answer to a question, the submission is first checked for validity. For example, the `pl-number-input` element considers a non-numeric input to be invalid. If the submission is valid then it is next determined whether it should be graded. A submission is only graded if explicitly requested by the student using the "Save & Grade" button, or if was the last submission when the assessment was closed.

Reviewer: Same as above.

Author: Changed in 73bed39950cc838d14c92387045d200036099085
